>> Share unlimited Gaia
originals with Gaia's share
feature.
Invite your friends
to watch free.
[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>SUE MORTER: There are so many
healing modalities out there
to target various health issues.
Ayurveda, however,
is a philosophy
that doesn't just see a
single illness or symptom,
but aims to bring all systems
of the body into balance.
Dr. Nita Desai is a medical
doctor in integrative medicine
and a certified
Ayurvedic practitioner
who specializes in women's
health, digestive health,
thyroid disorders, and
autoimmune conditions.
And she's here
today to demonstrate
how we can experience what
she calls, healthy happiness.
Welcome, Dr. Desai
to "Healing Matrix."
>>NITA DESAI: Thank you.
>>SUE: We're so happy to have
you and your brilliant wisdom
with us today.
And we know that behind
every brilliant mind,
there's a human being.
So can you tell us
your human story
that brought you into this
specialty, into this practice?
>>NITA: Well, I started
out in my residency,
I was just a regular
old family practice
doctor doing a residency in LA.
And one of my preceptors
knew a lot about Ayurveda.
And so the way that I
got drawn into Ayurveda
and the integrative is I would
come out after seeing a patient
and he would give me
the simplest advice.
Try this, try that, a
lot of home remedies.
And I would go in and I didn't
really know what I was doing,
but I would relay the message.
And my patients would go home.
And the next time they
would come back to see me
and they would be better.
And I was really surprised.
And so that was my first
introduction to Ayurveda.
>>SUE: And what did you
notice in your patients,
in particular, in your
residency program?
>>NITA: Well, it just seemed
like when he was precepting,
when he was the one that
we had to ask for advice,
people seemed to get better.
They seemed to do well.
It seemed like the advice was
really more attentive to what
they were asking for, as
opposed to just an agenda
that you might have.
As a medical doctor, we got
to go through this list.
And it really was something
that made them feel good.
>>SUE: So it was something more
than just stimulus response,
issue, give them this.
>>NITA: Give them
something that's
going to improve the
quality of their life.
That's going to make them happy.
That's going to make them
feel like they were heard.
And they felt listened too.
>>SUE: A visible person.
>>NITA: Yes.
>>SUE: So maybe you could
just explain for our viewers
about Ayurveda.
What it is for you.
>>NITA: So for me, I really look
at Ayurveda as a philosophy.
I feel that you can apply
the principles of Ayurveda
to just about anything you do.
So as a medical doctor,
I can think of it
when I need to give
somebody an antibiotic.
I can think about
it if I'm going
to ask someone to take herbs,
or nutrition, or lifestyle.
But it can be used for
massage, aroma therapy.
Any modality of healing,
you could use the principles
or the philosophy of Ayurveda.
Because most of those principles
are really energetic principles
of how you see the body.
>>SUE: What kind of people--
who is it that approaches you?
What is the patient
that seeks you out?
>>NITA: So being
a medical doctor
and being that I kind of
integrate functional medicine
and Ayurveda and have
an East-West practice,
the kind of people I
see tend to be people
who have seen multiple people.
They've been to 10
different practitioners.
They've done the whole
Western medicine route.
They've gone to the Mayo
Clinic, or National Jewish,
or whatever the high
level centers are.
And then they also might have
dabbled in some alternatives.
They might have seen a
naturopath, or a chiropractor,
or tried acupuncture.
And nothing has really
worked for them.
So by the time they
come to see me,
they've really been
through a journey already.
>>SUE: We are all unique.
And we have to find the
path that works for us.
And so in this, why do you
feel that healing happens
with Ayurveda that it might
not be being accomplished
with other approaches?
>>NITA: I think the energetics
has a lot to do with it.
I think a lot of
the other approaches
sometimes don't take
that into account.
And a lot of patients,
especially when
they're very ill,
there's a weakness there.
There's a delicacy there.
And if you don't take into
account the energetic balance
of that individual, even the
best medicine in the world
can throw them over and get them
out of balance, just because it
was too much for them.
>>SUE: I think it's
important for viewers
to recognize that the energies
that we're speaking about
are really subtle energies.
And so important
for us to realize,
we're talking about this
subtle, invisible energy
behind the scenes that can
have everything to do with
whether we heal or not.
And I know that you
measure these things
and reference the doshas.
Can you explain to
us what doshas are
and share some insights there?
>>NITA: So because I
do the East-West thing,
I always like to try
to explain it in a way
that Westerners will understand.
So when I think of
the doshas, I do
think of them as the
energies that stand behind
and control some of the physical
activities of our bodies.
So, for example, the vata dosha
is the energetic principle
that stands behind
the nervous system
and controls the nervous
system of the body.
It controls the
movement, the change.
Everything that's
happening in the body
that has to do with movement,
and change, and transformation.
To some degree,
the vata dosha is
the energy behind that
that's controlling that.
It's sort of like
the puppet master.
And it's a very subtle,
as you said, concept.
>>SUE: Can you just
explain the relationship
between the elements
and the doshas?
And how many doshas?
There's three main doshas.
>>NITA: Three doshas.
>>SUE: And there are elements
associated with each.
Just give us a big
overarching picture
here for people that
may not be familiar.
>>NITA: So in Ayurveda, we
talk about five elements.
So the Chinese
medical system chooses
to leave the five
elements separately
and they deal with
the five elements
as five separate elements.
We feel that in living things,
in anything that's alive,
those elements actually
combine in a certain way.
And it's more relevant
to talk about the doshas.
So we combined wind
and air or space air--
that concept of space--
and we call the concept of wind
and we combine them together
and we create the vata dosha.
We combine fire and water,
because in human or even
in any biological
system that's alive,
there are no fires
that are without water.
Our fires are biological fires.
They're mostly
biochemical reactions.
And so we combine fire
and water together
to create the pitta dosha.
And then we combine
water and earth element
to do something called
the kapha dosha.
And kapha, again, is in our--
we're not as hard as a rock.
We don't have pure
Earth elements.
We're a combination for the
physicality of our body.
So it's more that Ayurveda likes
to make things easy and simple.
>>SUE: Can you give us
examples about people having
a specific dosha imbalance?
Like, what might be
happening that someone
would recognize symptoms?
>>NITA: So the simplest one,
since I live in Colorado,
that I see all the time is
when the vata dosha goes out
of balance.
So we live at a very high
altitude in Colorado.
It's very dry.
It can be very windy.
It can be very cold.
These are all factors that
really aggravate the vata
dosha.
So when the vata dosha
gets more aggravated,
things start to scatter.
And so when you see somebody
who's really vata aggravated,
they feel scattered.
They feel ungrounded.
They might have issues
with anxiety or worry.
They can't focus.
They don't know how to pull
themselves together and focus.
So that would be an example of
a vata type of an imbalance.
>>SUE: And people can have
multiple doshas expressing
simultaneously, can
you speak about that?
>>NITA: So a typical
vata person is someone
who has a lot of creativity.
They really love to do
many different things
and they like to dabble in
a lot of different things.
They're open-minded.
They're flexible.
However, somebody
who's very pitta,
they usually tend to be
more type A. Organized,
get things done type of people.
So you would get your
more type A person
and then you might get you
a more creative person.
But then there are people who
are vata and pitta together
so those people have
elements of both.
And so an example
would be they're
really good at multitasking.
They can look at
the big picture.
See the entire forest.
Be really creative with it.
And then they can take
care of all the details
and they can go back and forth.
So that would be an
example of someone
who is vata pitta, where
they have two doshas that
are dominant in their body.
And then there's various
versions of that in Ayurveda.
>>SUE: And do you
see it changing over
the course of someone's life?
Is there a phase in their
life where they're more pitta
and a phase of their life
where they become more kapha?
Or is it, pretty much,
here's your signature,
this is what you're
dealing with?
>>NITA: Well, everybody has
a signature that they were--
that at the time of
conception from your parents,
you inherit a certain
energetic signature.
And we say that is
your constitution.
However, it is then influenced
by many, many things,
the stages of your life.
We say the early
stage of your life
as your growing and building
is a very kapha stage.
The middle stage, after
puberty and until menopause,
is sort of your middle stage,
very pitta part of your life.
And then usually after menopause
or late 50s, early 60s for men,
it starts to become
the vata part of life.
And so the seasons
can affect the doshas
and your constitution.
Where you live can affect it.
What part of your
life you're in.
There's so many things
that can affect it,
even though, the
actual constitution,
the actual energetic signature
that you're born with
doesn't really change.
What changes is how it
goes out of balance.
So the idea is I have to figure
out what's your constitution?
What is going on right now?
How is it out of balance?
And then I try to bring you
back into balance, again.
>>SUE: I know that
at one time I moved
from being in a clinical
practice, such as yourself,
into traveling all
the time and teaching.
And I was on airplanes and the
dry, and the wind, the wind.
>>NITA: Yes, the wind.
>>SUE: So I had to
begin some practices--
Abhyanga, the oils, and
these kinds of things
to bring a harmony into the
energetics of my own system.
So I'm a big fan, definitely.
>>NITA: Absolutely.
Travel is very vata aggravating.
>>SUE: Yes, vata
deranged was the word
that was used to get
you under control here.
So I have great appreciation
for what you're doing.
So when you begin
working with someone,
is it typically that
you begin with the foods
and the nutritional component?
Is that where you typically
begin with people?
>>NITA: I usually like to
start with diet, nutrition,
and digestion.
Because that's kind of
the core of a person.
We really feel from
Ayurvedic point of view
that someone's digestive
fire, their ability
to assimilate nutrients is very,
very important to their core
well-being.
So for that reason,
many, many times,
I will start with
that basic foundation.
>>SUE: And there are so
many diet plans out there
that people are plugging
into from a variety
of different places, different
reasons and motivations
for doing so, how does one
select something that's
going to work for them inside
of the construct of Ayurveda?
>>NITA: So with
Ayurveda, we look at diet
completely differently.
We're not looking at
proteins, fats, carbs.
We're not necessarily
even looking
at nutrients or
nutrient content.
We're really looking at diet
from a completely energetic
component.
We're seeing, how is
this going to affect
your body energetically?
So I can, many times, not remove
the entire diet from somebody.
If they choose to be
paleo because that's
something they really
love, I sometimes
don't even have to remove that
or tell them to change that.
I can just tweak it
a little bit to make
it more pacifying,
more agreeable
to their constitution.
And so that's how
I work with diet.
I like people to have some
flexibility in what they enjoy,
what their lifestyle
is all about.
But at the same
time, there's ways
of tweaking it to make
it so that you're going
to digest the food better.
>>SUE: There are
certain foods that have
certain qualities of energies.
And a person might
have a certain energy
that they're exhibiting or
experiencing at a certain time.
And it's about
finding foods that
are going to have to balance
these energies for them.
Can you give us some examples
of a certain kind of food
and the kind of energy quality
that it contains that you
might use for these purposes?
>>NITA: Yeah, absolutely.
So an example is
cayenne pepper, which
is so easy to do as an
example because it's so hot.
There's no denying
the heat of it.
So if you burnt yourself and
you had a burn on your skin,
the last thing you would do
is shake some cayenne pepper
on it.
Because you would know that
would sting, and burn, and not
heal.
So in the same way, if
you have a lot of burning
pain in your stomach and that
was some of your symptoms,
you probably don't want to
be eating very spicy food
because it's going to
aggravate that condition.
But if you put something
very cool, energetically
cool into your
digestive system when
you're having that
burning pain, it's
going to cool your system down.
So milk, actually, can be very
cooling if you can digest it.
But aloe vera juice,
which is really popular.
There's a lot of aloe juices out
there now, can be very cooling.
Watermelon is very cooling.
So that's an example of
how we might use energetics
to actually treat something.
And if we had to
pick and choose,
I would choose the one that was
energetically more appropriate,
rather than the one that
was just therapeutically,
this is going to be
what treats your issue.
But if it's more
cooling, then I'm
going to choose that
for that person.
>>SUE: Can you give us an
example of small changes
that someone could
make in their diet that
would have a large impact on
how they metabolize, or digest,
or something along these lines,
that anyone could safely begin
doing that would be helpful?
>>NITA: So one of the things
I see a lot of, again,
because we live
here in Colorado,
is gas, bloating,
and constipation
is such a common symptom.
And if somebody is doing a lot
of raw foods, a lot of salads,
I'll just switch them over
to a cooked food diet.
Where they're doing
more soups more
stews, adding a little bit
more moisture into their food.
Warming their food up so that
it's not ice cold right out
of the refrigerator.
And that simple trick of just
eating more warm, cooked food
can completely take away
the gas, the bloating,
and the constipation
many, many times.
>>SUE: I have such
a deep appreciation
for such a holistic approach to
anything regarding health care.
And I know that the mind,
body, and spirit components
are all a part of Ayurveda.
That we're not just talking
about here's your body
and here's the foods that
you're going to put in it
and here we go.
Can you speak to how mind,
body, and spirit are related
in the digestive complex?
>>NITA: Absolutely.
So from a Western point of
view, so many people come in
and they're just
focused on the food.
I'm eating this and I'm getting
sick, or I'm not feeling good,
or these are my symptoms.
So there is a physical
component of something
that might be irritating
or not digesting well.
But there's also the
mental emotional component
that the thought that you
are having around that food
or when you ate,
your feelings can
affect how you digest the food.
Because ultimately,
your digestive system
is a huge nervous system.
So there's that piece that's,
sort of, the mind body piece,
the gut brain connection that so
many people are talking about,
which Ayurveda has
always incorporated
into how it treats people.
And then there's the
spiritual part, which
is just so, I think, important.
Because food is really about
nurturing and nourishing
the body.
And when people start to
have so many digestive issues
and have so many
issues with food,
there's a huge disconnect
that can happen.
Where more and more food--
food becomes the bad guy.
And I think that would be
an example of how now we're
getting into an existential
spiritual issue here.
You need to nourish your body,
but you think all food is bad.
>>SUE: So that conflict alone
can just shut down the system,
throw us into fight or flight.
>>NITA: Exactly.
>>SUE: And nothing's happening
now, except running from bears.
>>NITA: Exactly.
You're not going to digest food
if you think it's the bad guy.
You're not going
to digest anything
if you're so worried,
so nervous, so stressed
every time you eat.
That oh, my god,
what's going to happen?
Am I going to feel bad?
And so there is a huge nervous
system emotional feeling.
There's just a huge
connection there
that's mind, body,
spirit, in my opinion.
>>SUE: And so,
someone has heartburn,
what's the mind,
body, and spirit
approach to some symptom like
that, that seems so commonplace
that Ayurveda would take?
>>NITA: An example for
heartburn would be physically,
we might work on the heat.
We say heartburn, again,
that burning sensation
is a lot of heat in the body.
So on the level of the physical,
we might avoid the spicy foods.
We might avoid sour foods.
Foods that irritate
the physical aspect
of that burning to
heal the physical.
Mentally, emotionally,
heartburn can have a lot
to do with the pitta dosha.
It can have a lot to do
with anger, frustration,
irritability--
a lot of those emotions,
a lot of the type
A behavior that goes
along with pitta.
So being able to calm the
brain down and get people
to be cooler from a mental
health point of view,
a little more
diffuse, not so type A
can really help with heartburn.
And then from a spiritual
level, again, energetically, we
say that the vata scatters,
but that it pulls things up.
So it's pulling a lot of
heat in an upward direction.
So when the vata pushes the
pitta in an upward direction,
that's an energetic imbalance.
And there's various things
we would do in Ayurveda
to help balance that back down
and get the energies to come
back into balance.
>>SUE: One example.
>>NITA: Of the vata--
>>SUE: Of what you
would do right there.
>>NITA: So that's
where the way you eat
would actually be a vata
pitta balancing diet.
So I would want you to eat
warm, cooked, moist foods.
But at the same time, I would
make sure that nothing you eat
is spicy, hot, sour, acidic.
And so the combination
of very specific diet.
And in some cases
like that, we would
be very specific about your diet
for a certain period of time,
six to eight weeks, to get
the energies to come down.
We might add the oil
massages for the vata--
which you talked about
a lot, which actually
take that scattered energy and
bring it back to the center
and ground you.
So we might do some lifestyle
things, like the oil massage.
We might take afternoon
naps because maybe, there's
a fatigue factor going on
and the heartburn's only
happening at night.
And you're stressing
your system out
and there's a stress
component here.
So then maybe between
2:00 to 4:00, which we say
is the adrenal time
of the day, maybe
you would rest a little bit.
Take even a 10-minute
break to allow yourself
to recover and let
the adrenals come back
to a nice, healthy place.
>>SUE: To kind of reset.
>>NITA: Reset themselves, yeah.
So there's so many
things I would
do that are not just
conventional ways of treating
heartburn.
>>SUE: Take a Tums.
And then you're
taking Tums every day
and wondering why you're
not feeling so well.
And wondering why other
things are starting to happen.
And it's all because the
system is just out of balance.
Just bring the
system into balance.
>>NITA: And there's a great
example that I have of a woman
that I worked with
for many years
and we got her almost completely
free of her heartburn.
She was on a great
diet, great lifestyle.
Every once in a while,
twice a week or so,
she would get her heartburn.
And we just couldn't
figure out what it was.
And I asked her to stop running
because she was a runner
and she was very vata.
And vata people
shouldn't really run.
It's a very vata
aggravating sport.
And she realized that every
time she ran, she got heartburn.
>>SUE: Interesting.
>>NITA: So that energetic
thing of running,
which was aggravating her vata,
was causing the heartburn.
>>SUE: Even though she loved it.
>>NITA: Even though
she loved it.
>>SUE: It wasn't
working for her.
>>NITA: It wasn't working.
>>SUE: So what would you
suggest that she do, instead?
>>NITA: Walking, swimming, yoga.
Anything that's a little more
rhythmic, a little more vata
pacifying.
Something that's more
grounding, more nurturing.
So all of the graceful
sort of sports.
Dance, if it's a real
graceful type of dance.
Even just going on elliptical,
where you're not really running
and getting that high impact.
Just doing elliptical
machine might
help if it's done in
a very rhythmic way.
>>SUE: Especially being outside
in the elements and the wind
and all that is
even aggravating.
>>NITA: It might be
aggravating even further--
absolutely.
>>SUE: Very interesting.
So what about these
digestive symptoms,
are they the telltale sign
that something more significant
is going on?
Or are we able to really
catch these things
when they're just an
introductory symptom that's
revealing?
Is there concern
that people should
have one when they're
having these symptoms,
that there's something
serious behind the scenes?
>>NITA: There's not
always something
serious behind the scenes.
But our philosophy
in Ayurveda is
that some of these
digestive issues
are the beginnings of
things going out of balance.
And that if we let them continue
to be out of balance, that's
when 20 or 30 years later,
people come to you and say,
I got cancer and I
have no idea why.
Well, if you trace
someone's history back,
you might see that there
were these symptoms of things
going out of balance.
Constipation, or gas, or
bloating, or whether it's
heartburn.
Whatever it is,
that digestively,
they were having issues.
But they just chose to
ignore it or they didn't
realize that was an issue.
Or like me, when I was just
doing regular old family
practice, I didn't really
have any good solutions
to offer people of how
to permanently really fix
the core imbalance,
not just medicate
it to get the symptoms away.
Like Tums or some
heartburn medicine.
>>SUE: It's such a shortcoming
in Western medicine
and the general approach that
has been symptom-related,
treating the symptom instead of
generating balance in the body.
And I know that our viewers
are very interested in hey,
give us the information that
allows us to take charge,
to really be in charge of
creating the level of health
and vitality that we want.
So that we're not just
waiting for the other shoe
to fall until something
more significant happens.
And we end up having to go
into that system of medicating,
or surgeries, or
these kinds of things.
That we're preempting all that
by living in this balance.
>>NITA: And that's where
Ayurveda is so beautiful.
Because it is such a great
preventative science.
It's so much about--
I tell my patients, it's like
when you're by a computer,
it comes with a manual.
Well, Ayurveda is like
your user's manual.
Once you know what body
type you are and you
learn how to take care
of that body type,
you have your manual.
And you're going to know how
to take care of yourself.
And it's very preventative
to prevent further problems.
>>SUE: And it
allows us to thrive,
instead of just
trying to get by.
One of the things that plagues
our Western world is fatigue.
And lots of
approaches to fatigue
have shown up as on every street
corner, the coffee shop trying
to overcome the fatigue.
And some smarter
approaches, of course,
are available in all kinds
of health approaches.
And I know that integrative
medicine has their approach
and naturopathy would
have its approach.
And how would Ayurveda
address fatigue differently
than some of the
other disciplines?
>>NITA: Again, we look at the
energetics behind it, as well.
While in the Western
realm, a lot of times,
things go through fads.
First, people who had a
lot of fatigue had Candida
and nowadays, they have Lyme.
And there's always some
new kid on the block.
>>SUE: You're singing
my song, like,
what's the disease du jour?
>>NITA: The disease
of the day that's
causing all your problems
and that's why you're tired.
So we look actually
at the person
and their core imbalances.
What's going on inside of you?
What is out of balance?
How can I fix that?
And this is why you're
being affected, maybe,
by the Lyme, or the
Candida, or whatever it is.
Maybe that is
affecting you, but it's
because your immune
system is out of balance.
It's because your adrenals, the
core vitality, what do they do?
Adrenals are all
about homeostasis.
They're all about balance.
They affect your immune system.
They affect your
ability to have energy.
blood sugar balance.
And all of this is related.
So when I work with
somebody, I want
to work with the whole system.
It's really a comprehensive
plan that I have with people.
And I basically, tell them,
and we do have little groups
that we do a little
teaching around,
where you really have to have
a lifestyle to get better.
And it's not just
about one thing.
It's the whole
lifestyle that helps.
>>SUE: One of the things
people are recognizing
that adrenal fatigue
is a real issue with me
and how do I treat
the adrenal fatigue.
But I'm interested
in the question,
also, where does adrenal
fatigue come from?
So what would
Ayurveda have to say
about the cause of
adrenal fatigue,
regarding the doshas, et cetera?
>>NITA: So from an
Ayurvedic point of view,
severe adrenal fatigue, we call
it a severe vata imbalance.
It's when you've let that vata
dosha get so out of control, so
out of balance.
Where the energy of the
nervous system and then the
nervous system controls
the endocrine system--
everything has become so
scattered and so diffuse,
in a sense, that how can you,
if you even thought about it,
how could you have any energy
when everything is just
scattering out?
And so it's about
collecting all of that
and bring it back to
center and grounding it.
And so we say that
adrenal fatigue
is about that scattered
nervous system energy.
And I agree with you, people
get stuck in different phases,
depending on their body
type, their constitution,
how they view things.
A lot of times, it has to
do with their perceptions.
>>SUE: Creating
bears all the time.
Stress is-- everything's
out to get me.
I'm never safe.
That is constantly sending
that message to the body.
And the adrenal fatigue
and then the thyroid
gets affected by
the adrenal fatigue.
And you work with
the thyroid disorder
so speak to us about
your approach there.
Let's say that it's
progressed to the degree
that someone now has a thyroid
condition, what do you do?
>>NITA: So I work
with, again, looking
at all of the endocrine
system because I
feel like the whole endocrine
system is a big system.
I feel like that nervous system,
and the endocrine system,
and the immune system,
everything talks.
And so a lot of times,
thyroid function
will go down not just because
your thyroid is having
a problem, but many times,
it's because you just
don't have enough energy.
You're not supporting
yourself well enough.
And now your adrenals are
telling the thyroid, hey,
bud, you have no energy.
You can't keep metabolizing
at this normal rate.
We're going to lower
your metabolism.
So the thyroid is
actually down regulating.
And you want to know that
because just giving someone
thyroid hormone and up
regulating them back might not
solve the problem.
There might be a temporary
spurt of energy, again.
But eventually, they're
going to burn out, again.
And so working
with the adrenals,
working with the thyroid
around menopause.
The ovaries get involved there
with estrogen and progesterone.
There's so many cascades.
So again, Ayurveda is
all about the balance
between all of these things.
>>SUE: So there's
another thing that
is a common question about
seasonal affective disorder
and what does Ayurveda
have to say about this?
>>NITA: Again, we work so
much with things seasonally
and as the fall and
the winter comes on,
we say that's a vata
time of the year.
And so you'll notice I
use that word vata a lot.
It's because of the vata, we say
is 80% responsible for almost
all diseases.
And so that kind of
change and the body
is not able to
adapt to that change
because the vata is getting
more and more scattered,
we say that that is how
the seasonal affective
disorder comes about.
So it is a vata type
of an imbalance.
Having routines, waking
up at the same time,
going to bed at the same time,
eating your meals on time
really does help it a lot.
But also, it's, as we know
from a Western point of view,
the light-dark
transition and being
able to adapt to the shorter
days is a huge aspect of it.
So because I'm an
East-West practitioner,
I do a little bit of both.
So I use light visors
because they're
nice that you can
just put it right on.
It's like a little cap
and you turn the light on.
And as soon as you open
your eyes in the morning,
you stick that on.
And I always tell people
to start September 1.
And you wear it every single
day for 30 to 45 minutes
in the morning.
And you can do anything you
want to, other than jump
in the shower.
You can brush your
teeth with it on.
Drive your car to work.
And it works like a charm.
>>SUE: So it's bringing light.
>>NITA: It's bringing some
light into the back of the--
full spectrum light.
>>SUE: Helping the
circadian system.
>>NITA: Helping that helping
to reset your circadian rhythm.
And you're doing
it every single day
like a routine, in a rhythm,
first thing in the morning.
You're keeping
that rhythm going.
>>SUE: There's also kind
of a spiritual component
when we're having
these systems and we're
becoming devoted to a
rhythm, and a cycle,
and having some regularity.
And it's kind of this
caretaking idea that I matter.
And I'm going to set this
out as a system for myself.
And I matter enough
that I'm going to stick
to this kind of rhythm.
And so the spiritual
component kind of
comes in as a self-care
kind of element
all at the same time
that we're working
with these physical
elements, as well.
>>NITA: Yes, absolutely.
So self-care is so
much part of Ayurveda.
And it's so much part of
the nurturing of the body
is the self-care.
And the listening to the
body, which, I think, we
have forgotten to do is listen.
Our body is actually
talking to us.
When we are in pain, it's not
just because the body feels
like making our life horrible.
>>SUE: Miserable.
>>NITA: Miserable.
>>SUE: It's not against us.
It's not the enemy.
>>NITA: Yeah, it's
telling us, it's a signal.
>>SUE: It's like
hey, pay attention.
>>NITA: Yeah, something's wrong.
If we're tired, it's our
body signaling us saying
something's not right here.
I don't have enough energy.
And so to look at those
signals and to listen to them,
I think are really the
key that people sometimes
miss completely.
>>SUE: Learning to speak the
languages of the body, body
talk.
And I know as an
Ayurvedic practitioner,
you are also learning
the languages of the body
and you're reading
these languages.
You develop certain skills
to be able to give someone
the feedback about
their doshas, et cetera.
Can you speak about
the skills that you
use in your diagnostic process?
>>NITA: Yeah, the
Ayurvedic diagnosis
has been around for 5,000 years.
We use face diagnosis.
We look for things in the face.
We look at the tongue,
various things that
are going on with your tongue.
We look at nails.
We feel pulses.
And that constitution
that I talked
about in earlier, that's
usually done by pulse diagnosis.
So we feel what that
constitution that you
came into this world is.
And then we feel what's
gone out of balance.
So there's two separate
types of pulses
there that we're feeling.
But within that world of pulses,
we can feel organ pulses.
We can feel many
different things
that's going on in the body.
>>SUE: And this is a
fascinating thing that, I think,
our viewers are wanting
to hear more about.
Ayurveda is this beautiful
sophisticated approach
to recognizing there are
multiple pulses in the body.
And that each pulse
is revealing something
about these various
systems of the body.
Different organs, and glands,
and systems that work together
have their own
frequency energetically.
And we can pick up on that
with a different pulse.
And so can you share any
more about that, that might
be of interest for everyone?
>>NITA: Yeah, it's an
art and it's a science.
I think, it's both.
There's definitely
some technical aspects
where you have to learn
how to do pulse diagnosis.
So technically, you need to
know where to put your fingers.
How deep to feel.
All of these little
bits like that.
But then there's
an intuitive piece.
There's an art, as well, where
you're listening into the body.
And where you're trying
to-- what information
you want to get, you have
to be receptive to it.
So it's a balance between
an art and a science,
between an intuitive
and a technical aspect.
But with Ayurveda, when
we feel the pulses,
we're feeling deep
pulses sometimes.
We're feeling more
superficial pulses.
We have seven layers
of pulses, depending
on how hard you press down.
And within those layers,
we can feel pulses
as thready and very weak.
Or we can feel pulses that
are jumping like frogs at us.
Or we can feel pulses that are
more graceful and swan-like.
And so we're actually
looking at the rhythm.
We're looking at how it
comes up to meet our fingers.
Whether it's a thready
or a frog-like meeting.
There's so many nuances to it.
>>SUE: How beautiful.
And each of these is revealing
something different about how
the body is operating.
I grew up in natural
health care environment.
I've never gone to the
doctor to take an antibiotic
to relieve some symptom.
And so I have this
great appreciation
for what the body is
constantly revealing.
And the world of
bioenergetics where
we're matching
pulses and getting
them to synchronize in a
little bit different approach.
But the idea is that
we are energy beings.
And we have to learn to sense
and feel into energies in order
to maintain our true
vital force in the world.
Is there anything along the
lines of pulse diagnosis-- now,
not reading someone
else's pulse--
but that a person could sit
and sense about themselves?
Any kind of self-diagnostic
approach in Ayurveda?
Or is it, pretty much,
something that someone else
has to do the reading
and interview.
>>NITA: No, there's obviously,
there's many books on Ayurveda.
And almost all of them
will have a questionnaire.
>>SUE: A questionnaire there.
>>NITA: And you can definitely--
I usually tell people,
do the questionnaire
trying to remember what
you were like as a child.
Because most likely, you
were the most healthy
as a young person or a child.
And that might give
you your constitution.
And then do the questionnaire
of how you're feeling now.
And that will give
you your imbalance.
And so then you'll have a sense
of this must be my constitution
and this must be my imbalance.
But as you learn more
about the different doshas
and the characteristics,
if you tune into that,
you're going to know
what's out of balance.
But there's so much you
can do to self-heal, just
by thinking of qualities.
Like I said, hot and cold.
And I sometimes say, there's
20 attributes or qualities that
are opposite pairs in Ayurveda.
And just by using those
alone, you can heal yourself.
So if something
is cold, then you
want to apply some heat to it.
If something is
dry, then you want
to apply something
that's moist to it.
And just by using
those attributes alone,
you could do so much
to heal yourself.
By just sitting there
going inside, saying what
are the attributes?
What is it about it?
Well, my skin is really
dry and it's really rough.
OK, so maybe it need something
nice and moist on it.
That would be a very
simple example of something
you could do yourself.
>>SUE: We get the
gist of it, though.
So what we're doing
is bringing a harmony
by applying, or taking,
or eating differently
in accordance with what
we're sensing and perceiving
or that the doshas
are showing us.
And then as we
bring that harmony,
the body knows what
to do to heal itself.
So we're not trying
to heal ourselves,
we're bringing things together
to create the environment where
healing can
automatically take place.
>>NITA: Healing
happens spontaneously.
>>SUE: Yes.
>>NITA: You're just balancing
the energetics of it
so that you're putting
yourself in the right place.
>>SUE: And it's meant to be.
We're meant to be self-healing.
And I think this is something
that we can't hear it enough.
Because we've been inundated
and trained up to believe that
the healing comes from over
there, from the outside,
from a bottle or from something.
And healing happens in the body,
that's where healing happens.
But we can do some
things that will
allow the perfect environment
for that healing to take place.
And this is what you're
providing for people.
>>NITA: And this is
where sometimes when
people get overwhelmed and
they feel like they just
don't have time, this is where
the intuitive piece comes in.
This is where if you have
done the spiritual work
and you know how to go to that
center, that core of yourself,
if you know where to
find that quiet space,
it's almost like
a place of refuge,
a place to reset and rebalance.
And that alone can have
such a tremendous effect
on health and healing.
And I think that's what's
just missing from the West.
They don't understand
that piece.
And they don't really understand
what meditation or what
any of that really means.
It's just all kind of mumbly.
It's like I don't know
what you're talking about.
>>SUE: They might
seek meditation
for stress management,
but it's not
about cultivating the healing
presence within the system
as a way of living.
>>NITA: Learning that
you and inside of you
is an incredible presence and
an incredible healing potential.
And if you learn how to find
that place within yourself
anything is possible.
>>SUE: That we really
are that healing presence
and we have to train our
mind to come onto us.
That's how much of
a healer we are.
That's how much
of a self-healer.
We are the healer, but
our mind is so scattered
and it's not on
us as the healer,
to allow that healing
to take place.
And so by doing these practices
and by bringing these materials
in together and quickening
ourselves in the way
that you're describing for
vata, in particular, it
allows that presence
to do its thing.
And we get out of
the way with it.
So you mentioned
facial, and pulses,
and also looking at the tongue.
What is it that you're
looking for with the tongue?
I know lots of people are
always curious about that.
So can you just
share that with us?
>>NITA: So in the tongue, we're
looking to see if it's coated.
If it is coated, what part
of the tongue is coated
will tell us which organ system
might have a lot of toxins.
So tongue coating is
usually related to toxins.
The color of the
coating can give us
an indication if its'
kapha-type of toxins or pitta.
So yellowish color
might be a pitta toxin.
Very white might
be a kapha toxin.
Where it's located,
if it's all the way
in the back of the tongue,
that relates to the colon.
So just like a
little homunculus,
we have a little version
of ourselves on our tongue.
So we know where
all the organs are
and we can tell where
something is out of balance.
>>SUE: Kind of reflexology,
but also on the tongue.
It's just the tongue's version.
>>NITA: We look
at teeth marks yes
and that tells us
about malabsorption
and how you're doing with
hydration, malabsorption,
digestion, assimilation--
a lot of things like that.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
So we're referencing spirit
in parts of our conversation.
And I just love for you
to come back onto that
and give people an
understanding about what
this spiritual component is to
healing, regarding Ayurveda.
>>NITA: So in
Ayurveda, we really
feel that if you don't
take care of the spirit,
you really aren't
a healthy person.
So an example would be
maybe an elite athlete
who Western medicine might
look at that elite athlete
and say, wow, that's as
healthy as you can get.
They might be physically in
incredible shape, very healthy.
They might be eating
the right nutrients.
But if mentally,
emotionally, they're
extremely self-critical,
extremely type A,
never satisfied with
how well they do,
we would say that there's
a mental emotional.
We would not
consider that person
to be in harmony or in health.
So we say that health
is about balance.
The physical has
to be in balance.
The mental emotional piece
has to be in balance.
So there can't be that
self-critical, self-judgmental
piece in there.
And then there has to be
this spiritual place where
there's a sense of
contentment, which
I've alluded to a little bit.
There has to be some
spiritual contentment--
is the only word I can
think of right now.
And that all three of
those have to be layered on
and lined up for people
to be truly happy.
And so there's a
healthy happiness
is another way of saying it.
A balanced happiness
is a healthy happiness
and that's the spiritual piece.
>>SUE: So this happiness
idea is a big topic.
It's like the
pursuit of happiness.
How does Ayurveda look at
the pursuit of happiness?
What you're basically
saying is that it's not
something to pursue,
it's something to have.
It's something to just
set back in and enjoy.
Can you speak to that, at all?
>>NITA: And that's where the
piece that is really within
you--
so many people are
always going out
looking for things that are
going to make them happy.
And ultimately, the only thing
that can truly make you happy
is finding that little bit
of space inside of yourself
that is going to calm your mind.
That gap, if you want
to talk Deepak Chopra
language, that space with
between thoughts that really
is a place of complete calm.
And within that, there's
so much happiness.
It's not as exciting, maybe,
as something on the physical,
but it's a certain kind
of joy that you get.
A certain kind of
nurturing and nourishment
that you get that
nothing else can replace.
And so many people
are looking for that
and they just don't really know
what they're searching for.
So that yearning, that longing,
that searching that people
feel that discontent
with their life.
And they think they have to
fill it with material things.
>>SUE: Something.
>>NITA: Something.
Many times, it's really not
what they're looking for.
It's not on this physical plane.
And it is on that
spiritual plane.
And so that's when we talk
about healthy happiness,
that's what we're talking about.
And it's a balanced place.
It's not extreme in any way.
So there are many people
who even take the spiritual
to an extreme, where you give
up your whole life because you
think you need to be a
certain way spiritually.
And we would say that's a
little too extreme, too.
There's a balance
for ordinary people,
if you're not going to want
to be a monk or something
like that, there's a balance.
There's a balance between
this life, this life
that you have to lead.
You have to make money.
You have to be comfortable.
You have to be happy.
You have to have
good relationships
with people around you.
And then there's a spiritual
piece you can add on, as well.
And so it's about the
balance of all of that.
>>SUE: I know you were
speaking about this discomfort
with just being present,
just being with the gap,
being with the nothing, the
no thing, the nothingness.
One of the moments
in my life where
I was under the most
stress and strain,
so many things happening
at the same moment in time,
and I buckled over
and fell onto my bed.
And people would have called
it a break down in that moment.
But it was actually,
a break in for me.
Because in that moment,
the deepest pain
that I was feeling,
wrestling with
felt like I was falling
down this deep, dark well.
And in that moment, I
felt myself just let go.
And just say if everything goes
away, at least I'll have me.
I'll just be right here.
And in that moment
of acceptance,
there was the greatest sense
of joy I had ever experienced.
Here in the midst of all
this pain in my life,
this joy was rising up
that was so profound.
And I knew then that there
was something tremendously
important about accepting.
Accepting what is happening.
Accepting ourselves, et cetera.
And this is that happiness
that you're speaking
of that is unconditional.
It's inside of all of us.
That we're so busy
trying to make life
be a certain way that
we can't find it.
We can't land and find it.
You speak about
acceptance, compassion.
What can you share about
compassion in our conversation
now?
>>NITA: So I think it's
exactly what you said.
I think so much of it
is about our perceptions
and what we think
we need to be doing.
And compassion
starts with yourself.
Learning how to
be compassionate,
learning how to accept things
in your life for what they are.
So many times, I'll
tell somebody who's
tired well, just accept it.
You are tired.
And learning how to
accept it for what it is
makes it so that you're
not so hard on yourself.
And so that's where the whole
idea of nonviolence comes in.
And from an Ayurvedic
perspective,
from a yoga perspective,
we talk in the East a lot
about nonviolence.
And I feel that nonviolence
really begins with you,
individually, as a human being.
I think if you don't know how
to be nonviolent to yourself,
then you can't even talk
about it to other people.
And so being
nonviolent to the self
is about feeding yourself
when you're hungry.
You poor body's hungry, feed it.
Your poor body's
tired, let it rest.
Don't feel guilty because
you're taking a nap.
And for me, that's where
acceptance comes in,
compassion.
People need to learn
that sometimes it
requires you to think
of your body almost
as something separate
from yourself.
Because then you are more
compassionate towards it.
And sometimes, I'll--
just the other day,
I told a woman
who was seeing me,
I said think of your
body as a puppy.
What would you do?
Would you not feed your puppy?
>>SUE: One little whimper
and you're all over it.
>>NITA: I know, I know.
Would you not listen to it
when it was crying and sad?
Would you not give it a big hug?
>>SUE: Shh, the
puppy's sleeping.
>>NITA: So if you start to think
of yourself almost as a puppy,
then you realize how violent
you sometimes are to yourself.
Because you don't
listen to it very much.
You don't feed it
when it needs feeding.
You don't let it sleep
when it needs sleeping.
You don't go to the
bathroom sometimes when
you need to go pee.
You hold everything in.
And the same way with
emotions, with everything.
There's so much violence.
And I think that's sort
of the key for people.
If they can understand
that and start
applying some of that
to their own self,
that compassion leads to then
some acceptance of whatever
condition you're in.
And that acceptance
actually frees you.
I don't believe it--
it allows you to
not be overwhelmed.
I believe there's a
freeing that happens,
just like you explained.
There's a freedom in there.
There's a certain
unusual thing that
happens that unless it
happens to you many times,
you don't understand.
>>SUE: We don't have
a reference for it.
In our Western world,
we don't give ourselves
permission to tend to ourselves
the way that you're describing.
There's a tremendous amount
of guilt and expectation.
And we've carved a pathway,
neural pathways of habits,
and beliefs, and ways
of being that are so
driven by the mind, and
competition, and showing up,
and expectations.
That this idea of
puppy is so far
from where we're
performing and living.
So for somebody who's
caught up in that,
it's really in the drive, what
would you recommend for them?
Obviously, the obvious would be,
hey, give yourself permission.
But what if somebody's
like just full steam ahead?
What do you recommend?
>>NITA: So the way
I work, I always
work very gently with
people because you
can't make big changes.
And that's almost
another expectation
that then is going
to lead to failure.
And then you're going to
feel bad about yourself
because you want to change
your whole life overnight.
And that's just not
going to happen.
You're right, it's a habit.
It's such a rut.
It's not going to
happen overnight.
So what I do is I
start very small.
For example, if there's a
mom and she's overworked,
and she's busy,
and she's working,
and she's got the
kids, and she's
trying to balance
everything, so I
might say so you're
waiting in the car for 10
minutes while your kids
coming out of school.
Why don't you use
that 10 minutes?
that 10 minutes
to just close your eyes in your
car, take some deep breaths,
and just be so happy and
grateful that you have that 10
minutes while you're waiting?
>>SUE: Yes.
Take the time.
>>NITA: You can use that time.
And so sometimes, it's
about the small moments.
Giving yourself a break
in the small moments.
Learning how to say
OK, so what can go?
I'm super busy.
I have so many things to take
care of, what can I get rid of?
And it's about priorities.
I think we all think we
want to do more than we
really physically can do.
And it might be
about prioritizing.
And I'll sometimes tell
people so take one thing
off of your list every day, just
X it off your list every day.
And it's a great
habit to get into.
OK, I'm just going to X one
thing off my list every day.
So starting small is a
great place to start.
>>SUE: It seems so simple and
it's it'll move mountains.
It will move mountains.
And it's such a beautiful
approach, just one little thing
at a time I'm going to turn
this ship around and be
living a different
life before I know it.
So thank you so
much for being here.
When a medical doctor
sits down and says
you know what, loving
yourself is going
to be one of the most
important components
that you can implement to
turn your health around,
it carries a lot of weight.
It's different than
someone's best friend
saying that to them.
But you're doing this as
part of your practice.
And you're integrating
your integrative approach
with Ayurveda.
And bringing
science, lab testing,
all of this to the picture.
And at the same time, dropping
down to some fundamental basics
that are so important for
people to accept, to embrace,
to give themselves
permission to implement.
And it's changing
people's lives.
>>NITA: Thank you very much.
>>SUE: Thank you so much for
what you're doing, who you are.
And thank you so much for
being here with us today
and sharing your brilliance.
It's obvious that the
beauty of the human being
behind the scenes is what
makes your practice flourish.
So thank you.
>>NITA: Thank you
and you're welcome.
>>SUE: For many people who are
suffering with severe symptoms
or they may have even a small
chronic issue for which they
cannot get an answer, Ayurvedic
medicine may be just what they
need to find true health for
their mind, body, and spirit.
For more information
about Dr. Nita Desai
and her clinic, East-West
Integrated Medicine,
please visit nitadesaimd.com.
I'm Dr. sue Morter and thank you
for watching "Healing Matrix."
[MUSIC PLAYING]